to the Eurovision Song Contest in Malmo
Sweden now at the second semi-final on
Thursday evening Israel's entry Eden
Golan secured a place in Saturday's
finale earlier in the day thousands of
pro Palestinian demonstrators marched
through Malmo to protest against
Israel's inclusion in the contest this
year welcome to the second semifinal of
the Eurovision song contest
[Applause]
2024 the finalists for this year's
Eurovision contest have officially been
[Applause]
decided fan favorite Switzerland powered
their way through to the final
[Applause]
round their close competitors the
Netherlands stunned with a wild yet
emotional roller
coaster hold me again
but it was Israel's qualifying
performance that caused the biggest stir
much of it off stage Eurovision
organizers have faced calls to block
Israel from participating over the war
in Gaza more than 10,000 Pro Palestinian
protesters marched through the streets
of Malmo to protest Israel's inclusion
in the show and what we would like to
see is that they uh disqualify Israel
like they did with Russia uh when the
Russ invaded
Ukraine that's it's not true that the
Eurovision is not political it has
always been political those who
approached the arena where performances
were taking place were met with a heavy
police
presence in another part of the city
pro-israeli demonstrators also gathered
to support their
performers we thought it was important
to get together and celebrate celebrate
music celebrate the happiness instead of
the hate security is tight ahead of more
protests planned for Saturday when the
26 qualifying Nations will go
head-to-head in the Eurovision
finals right let's get more on this from
DW reporter David Levitz David good to
see you good morning hey so this year's
euro vision has been particularly
political hasn't it people protesting on
the streets and people boycotting
because of Israel's participation how
much of that was palpable at the show
well at the second semi-final last night
almost none of it if you were just
watching it on TV like millions of
people or on a you know a laptop screen
you really would have no idea that this
wasn't a normal Eurovision this year um
however earlier at a rehearsal that was
not broadcast Aiden Golan the Israeli
singer did get booed apparently by
members of that audience but that wasn't
broadcast as I said and a lot of this
appearance of normaly comes down to the
organizers the European broadcasting
Union really making a concerted effort
to not have protests on the screen um
and some of that is that they're
checking bags of audience members to
make sure that they don't sneak in
Palestinian Flags to wave in the
audience um or any other flag of of
Nations that aren't competing um but
what they can't control is uh the other
performers and actually earlier in the
week there were some protests or attempt
at protest by other performers the Irish
entry
had at the first semifinal some
political messages including ceasefire
removed from their costume the uh the
Swedish entry who's half Palestinian
himself or at least part Palestinian uh
snuck in a kfia Palestinian flag sorry
Palestinian scarf under his sleeve um
and that's that's raised some
controversy P people saying that that's
potentially a political statement um and
of course the Eurovision song contest is
supposed to be not political
now despite all these Pro protests and
all the calls to ban Israel's
participation euro vision has decided
the against it what is behind that
decision well it comes down to
eurovision's claim of being
non-political um it's supposed to be an
event that promotes peace and
understanding and at least that's why it
was started after World War II to bring
these countries together obviously
though there isn't peace on Earth um and
Eurovision has to to figure out what to
do about that euro vision did kick out
Russia andus in 2022 after Russia's
fullscale Invasion um of Ukraine so the
protesters are saying you know why not
kick out Israel based on what it's doing
in Gaza and the official answer to that
from the organizers is is pretty
Technical and it's pretty dry they say
that it's it's not the Nations
themselves it's not the governments
competing but it's actually the public
broadcasters that are part of this
European broadcasting Union even Israel
is part of it uh many countries are um
that are competing and that while they
had problems with public broadcasters in
Russia and bellarus not following the
rules um not guaranteeing freedom of
press that they don't have those
problems with the Israeli broadcasters
so that's a very dry technical answer
that's not satisfying a lot of the
protesters now when it comes to the song
the Israeli entry uh the Ebu did take
measures there because the original
lyrics were very much specifically about
hamas's terror attack on October the 7th
and they determined that that was too
political so they they actually made the
singer Aden Golan change her lyrics to
be able to participate so Israel is
certainly the country getting the most
attention but who else are people going
to be talking about at the Grand Finale
this Saturday yeah I think um they're
mostly going to be talking about Israel
let's let's be honest here but there
there are a few acts that are that are
getting attention for the acts
themselves one of them is Switzerland a
rapper named Neo I think we've got some
some pictures um of Neo who identifies
as nonbinary and it's it's believed that
Neo could be the first
nonbinary Eurovision song winner
Eurovision is also known as the Gay
Olympics um there have been trans
winners there have been gender bending
winners but there haven't been
non-binary winers winners so that that
could be a first something to watch out
for David litz thanks so much for coming
into the studio for that